# Day One 


## Genesis 1-6

**1**

In the beginning, God created the heavens and the earth.
The earth was formless and empty. Darkness was on the surface of the deep and God’s Spirit was hovering over the surface of the waters.  
God said, “Let there be light,” and there was light.
God saw the light, and saw that it was good. God divided the light from the darkness.
God called the light “day”, and the darkness he called “night”. There was evening and there was morning, the first day.  
God said, “Let there be an expanse in the middle of the waters, and let it divide the waters from the waters.”
God made the expanse, and divided the waters which were under the expanse from the waters which were above the expanse; and it was so.
God called the expanse “sky”. There was evening and there was morning, a second day.  
God said, “Let the waters under the sky be gathered together to one place, and let the dry land appear”; and it was so.
God called the dry land “earth”, and the gathering together of the waters he called “seas”. God saw that it was good.
God said, “Let the earth yield grass, herbs yielding seeds, and fruit trees bearing fruit after their kind, with their seeds in it, on the earth”; and it was so.
The earth yielded grass, herbs yielding seed after their kind, and trees bearing fruit, with their seeds in it, after their kind; and God saw that it was good.
There was evening and there was morning, a third day.  
God said, “Let there be lights in the expanse of sky to divide the day from the night; and let them be for signs to mark seasons, days, and years;
and let them be for lights in the expanse of sky to give light on the earth”; and it was so.
God made the two great lights: the greater light to rule the day, and the lesser light to rule the night. He also made the stars.
God set them in the expanse of sky to give light to the earth,
and to rule over the day and over the night, and to divide the light from the darkness. God saw that it was good.
There was evening and there was morning, a fourth day.  
God said, “Let the waters abound with living creatures, and let birds fly above the earth in the open expanse of sky.”
God created the large sea creatures and every living creature that moves, with which the waters swarmed, after their kind, and every winged bird after its kind. God saw that it was good.
God blessed them, saying, “Be fruitful, and multiply, and fill the waters in the seas, and let birds multiply on the earth.”
There was evening and there was morning, a fifth day.  
God said, “Let the earth produce living creatures after their kind, livestock, creeping things, and animals of the earth after their kind”; and it was so.
God made the animals of the earth after their kind, and the livestock after their kind, and everything that creeps on the ground after its kind. God saw that it was good.  
God said, “Let us make man in our image, after our likeness: and let them have dominion over the fish of the sea, and over the birds of the sky, and over the livestock, and over all the earth, and over every creeping thing that creeps on the earth.”
God created man in his own image. In God’s image he created him; male and female he created them.
God blessed them. God said to them, “Be fruitful, multiply, fill the earth, and subdue it. Have dominion over the fish of the sea, over the birds of the sky, and over every living thing that moves on the earth.”
God said, “Behold, I have given you every herb yielding seed, which is on the surface of all the earth, and every tree, which bears fruit yielding seed. It will be your food.
To every animal of the earth, and to every bird of the sky, and to everything that creeps on the earth, in which there is life, I have given every green herb for food;” and it was so.  
God saw everything that he had made, and, behold, it was very good. There was evening and there was morning, a sixth day.   


**2**

The heavens, the earth, and all their vast array were finished.
On the seventh day God finished his work which he had done; and he rested on the seventh day from all his work which he had done.
God blessed the seventh day, and made it holy, because he rested in it from all his work of creation which he had done.  
This is the history of the generations of the heavens and of the earth when they were created, in the day that Yahweh God made the earth and the heavens.
No plant of the field was yet in the earth, and no herb of the field had yet sprung up; for Yahweh God had not caused it to rain on the earth. There was not a man to till the ground,
but a mist went up from the earth, and watered the whole surface of the ground.
Yahweh God formed man from the dust of the ground, and breathed into his nostrils the breath of life; and man became a living soul.
Yahweh God planted a garden eastward, in Eden, and there he put the man whom he had formed.
Out of the ground Yahweh God made every tree to grow that is pleasant to the sight, and good for food, including the tree of life in the middle of the garden and the tree of the knowledge of good and evil.
A river went out of Eden to water the garden; and from there it was parted, and became the source of four rivers.
The name of the first is Pishon: it flows through the whole land of Havilah, where there is gold;
and the gold of that land is good. Bdellium and onyx stone are also there.
The name of the second river is Gihon. It is the same river that flows through the whole land of Cush.
The name of the third river is Hiddekel. This is the one which flows in front of Assyria. The fourth river is the Euphrates.
Yahweh God took the man, and put him into the garden of Eden to cultivate and keep it.
Yahweh God commanded the man, saying, “You may freely eat of every tree of the garden;
but you shall not eat of the tree of the knowledge of good and evil; for in the day that you eat of it, you will surely die.”  
Yahweh God said, “It is not good for the man to be alone. I will make him a helper comparable to him.”
Out of the ground Yahweh God formed every animal of the field, and every bird of the sky, and brought them to the man to see what he would call them. Whatever the man called every living creature became its name.
The man gave names to all livestock, and to the birds of the sky, and to every animal of the field; but for man there was not found a helper comparable to him.
Yahweh God caused the man to fall into a deep sleep. As the man slept, he took one of his ribs, and closed up the flesh in its place.
Yahweh God made a woman from the rib which had taken from the man, and brought her to the man.
The man said, “This is now bone of my bones, and flesh of my flesh. She will be called ‘woman,’ because she was taken out of Man.”
Therefore a man will leave his father and his mother, and will join with his wife, and they will be one flesh.
The man and his wife were both naked, and they were not ashamed.   


**3**

Now the serpent was more subtle than any animal of the field which Yahweh God had made. He said to the woman, “Has God really said, ‘You shall not eat of any tree of the garden?’”  
The woman said to the serpent, “We may eat fruit from the trees of the garden,
but not the fruit of the tree which is in the middle of the garden. God has said, ‘You shall not eat of it, neither shall you touch it, lest you die.’”  
The serpent said to the woman, “You won’t surely die,
for God knows that in the day you eat it, your eyes will be opened, and you will be like God, knowing good and evil.”  
When the woman saw that the tree was good for food, and that it was a delight to the eyes, and that the tree was to be desired to make one wise, she took some of its fruit, and ate; and she gave some to her husband with her, and he ate it, too.
Their eyes were opened, and they both knew that they were naked. They sewed fig leaves together, and made coverings for themselves.
They heard the voice of Yahweh God walking in the garden in the cool of the day, and the man and his wife hid themselves from the presence of Yahweh God among the trees of the garden.  
Yahweh God called to the man, and said to him, “Where are you?”  
The man said, “I heard your voice in the garden, and I was afraid, because I was naked; and I hid myself.”  
God said, “Who told you that you were naked? Have you eaten from the tree that I commanded you not to eat from?”  
The man said, “The woman whom you gave to be with me, she gave me fruit from the tree, and I ate it.”  
Yahweh God said to the woman, “What have you done?”   The woman said, “The serpent deceived me, and I ate.”  
Yahweh God said to the serpent,  “Because you have done this, you are cursed above all livestock, and above every animal of the field. You shall go on your belly and you shall eat dust all the days of your life. 
I will put hostility between you and the woman, and between your offspring and her offspring. He will bruise your head, and you will bruise his heel.”   
To the woman he said,  “I will greatly multiply your pain in childbirth. In pain you will bear children. Your desire will be for your husband, and he will rule over you.”   
To Adam he said,  “Because you have listened to your wife’s voice, and ate from the tree, about which I commanded you, saying, ‘You shall not eat of it,’ the ground is cursed for your sake. You will eat from it with much labor all the days of your life. 
It will yield thorns and thistles to you; and you will eat the herb of the field. 
By the sweat of your face will you eat bread until you return to the ground, for out of it you were taken. For you are dust, and to dust you shall return.”   
The man called his wife Eve because she would be the mother of all the living.
Yahweh God made coats of animal skins for Adam and for his wife, and clothed them.  
Yahweh God said, “Behold, the man has become like one of us, knowing good and evil. Now, lest he reach out his hand, and also take of the tree of life, and eat, and live forever...”
Therefore Yahweh God sent him out from the garden of Eden, to till the ground from which he was taken.
So he drove out the man; and he placed cherubim at the east of the garden of Eden, and a flaming sword which turned every way, to guard the way to the tree of life.   


**4**

The man knew Eve his wife. She conceived, and gave birth to Cain, and said, “I have gotten a man with Yahweh’s help.”
Again she gave birth, to Cain’s brother Abel. Abel was a keeper of sheep, but Cain was a tiller of the ground.
As time passed, Cain brought an offering to Yahweh from the fruit of the ground.
Abel also brought some of the firstborn of his flock and of its fat. Yahweh respected Abel and his offering,
but he didn’t respect Cain and his offering. Cain was very angry, and the expression on his face fell.
Yahweh said to Cain, “Why are you angry? Why has the expression of your face fallen?
If you do well, won’t it be lifted up? If you don’t do well, sin crouches at the door. Its desire is for you, but you are to rule over it.”
Cain said to Abel, his brother, “Let’s go into the field.” While they were in the field, Cain rose up against Abel, his brother, and killed him.  
Yahweh said to Cain, “Where is Abel, your brother?”   He said, “I don’t know. Am I my brother’s keeper?”  
Yahweh said, “What have you done? The voice of your brother’s blood cries to me from the ground.
Now you are cursed because of the ground, which has opened its mouth to receive your brother’s blood from your hand.
From now on, when you till the ground, it won’t yield its strength to you. You will be a fugitive and a wanderer in the earth.”  
Cain said to Yahweh, “My punishment is greater than I can bear.
Behold, you have driven me out this day from the surface of the ground. I will be hidden from your face, and I will be a fugitive and a wanderer in the earth. Whoever finds me will kill me.”  
Yahweh said to him, “Therefore whoever slays Cain, vengeance will be taken on him sevenfold.” Yahweh appointed a sign for Cain, so that anyone finding him would not strike him.  
Cain left Yahweh’s presence, and lived in the land of Nod, east of Eden.
Cain knew his wife. She conceived, and gave birth to Enoch. He built a city, and called the name of the city, after the name of his son, Enoch.
To Enoch was born Irad. Irad became the father of Mehujael. Mehujael became the father of Methushael. Methushael became the father of Lamech.
Lamech took two wives: the name of the first one was Adah, and the name of the second one was Zillah.
Adah gave birth to Jabal, who was the father of those who dwell in tents and have livestock.
His brother’s name was Jubal, who was the father of all who handle the harp and pipe.
Zillah also gave birth to Tubal Cain, the forger of every cutting instrument of brass and iron. Tubal Cain’s sister was Naamah.
Lamech said to his wives,  “Adah and Zillah, hear my voice. You wives of Lamech, listen to my speech, for I have slain a man for wounding me, a young man for bruising me. 
If Cain will be avenged seven times, truly Lamech seventy-seven times.”   
Adam knew his wife again. She gave birth to a son, and named him Seth, “for God has given me another child instead of Abel, for Cain killed him.”
A son was also born to Seth, and he named him Enosh. At that time men began to call on Yahweh’s name.   


**5**

This is the book of the generations of Adam. In the day that God created man, he made him in God’s likeness.
He created them male and female, and blessed them. On the day they were created, he named them “Adam”.
Adam lived one hundred thirty years, and became the father of a son in his own likeness, after his image, and named him Seth.
The days of Adam after he became the father of Seth were eight hundred years, and he became the father of other sons and daughters.
All the days that Adam lived were nine hundred thirty years, then he died.  
Seth lived one hundred five years, then became the father of Enosh.
Seth lived after he became the father of Enosh eight hundred seven years, and became the father of other sons and daughters.
All the days of Seth were nine hundred twelve years, then he died.  
Enosh lived ninety years, and became the father of Kenan.
Enosh lived after he became the father of Kenan, eight hundred fifteen years, and became the father of other sons and daughters.
All the days of Enosh were nine hundred five years, then he died.  
Kenan lived seventy years, then became the father of Mahalalel.
Kenan lived after he became the father of Mahalalel eight hundred forty years, and became the father of other sons and daughters
and all the days of Kenan were nine hundred ten years, then he died.  
Mahalalel lived sixty-five years, then became the father of Jared.
Mahalalel lived after he became the father of Jared eight hundred thirty years, and became the father of other sons and daughters.
All the days of Mahalalel were eight hundred ninety-five years, then he died.  
Jared lived one hundred sixty-two years, then became the father of Enoch.
Jared lived after he became the father of Enoch eight hundred years, and became the father of other sons and daughters.
All the days of Jared were nine hundred sixty-two years, then he died.  
Enoch lived sixty-five years, then became the father of Methuselah.
After Methuselah’s birth, Enoch walked with God for three hundred years, and became the father of more sons and daughters.
All the days of Enoch were three hundred sixty-five years.
Enoch walked with God, and he was not found, for God took him.  
Methuselah lived one hundred eighty-seven years, then became the father of Lamech.
Methuselah lived after he became the father of Lamech seven hundred eighty-two years, and became the father of other sons and daughters.
All the days of Methuselah were nine hundred sixty-nine years, then he died.  
Lamech lived one hundred eighty-two years, then became the father of a son.
He named him Noah, saying, “This one will comfort us in our work and in the toil of our hands, caused by the ground which Yahweh has cursed.”
Lamech lived after he became the father of Noah five hundred ninety-five years, and became the father of other sons and daughters.
All the days of Lamech were seven hundred seventy-seven years, then he died.  
Noah was five hundred years old, then Noah became the father of Shem, Ham, and Japheth.   


**6**

When men began to multiply on the surface of the ground, and daughters were born to them,
God’s sons saw that men’s daughters were beautiful, and they took any that they wanted for themselves as wives.
Yahweh said, “My Spirit will not strive with man forever, because he also is flesh; so his days will be one hundred twenty years.”
The Nephilim were in the earth in those days, and also after that, when God’s sons came in to men’s daughters and had children with them. Those were the mighty men who were of old, men of renown.  
Yahweh saw that the wickedness of man was great in the earth, and that every imagination of the thoughts of man’s heart was continually only evil.
Yahweh was sorry that he had made man on the earth, and it grieved him in his heart.
Yahweh said, “I will destroy man whom I have created from the surface of the ground—man, along with animals, creeping things, and birds of the sky—for I am sorry that I have made them.”
But Noah found favor in Yahweh’s eyes.  
This is the history of the generations of Noah: Noah was a righteous man, blameless among the people of his time. Noah walked with God.
Noah became the father of three sons: Shem, Ham, and Japheth.
The earth was corrupt before God, and the earth was filled with violence.
God saw the earth, and saw that it was corrupt, for all flesh had corrupted their way on the earth.  
God said to Noah, “I will bring an end to all flesh, for the earth is filled with violence through them. Behold, I will destroy them and the earth.
Make a ship of gopher wood. You shall make rooms in the ship, and shall seal it inside and outside with pitch.
This is how you shall make it. The length of the ship shall be three hundred cubits, its breadth fifty cubits, and its height thirty cubits.
You shall make a roof in the ship, and you shall finish it to a cubit upward. You shall set the door of the ship in its side. You shall make it with lower, second, and third levels.
I, even I, do bring the flood of waters on this earth, to destroy all flesh having the breath of life from under the sky. Everything that is in the earth will die.
But I will establish my covenant with you. You shall come into the ship, you, your sons, your wife, and your sons’ wives with you.
Of every living thing of all flesh, you shall bring two of every sort into the ship, to keep them alive with you. They shall be male and female.
Of the birds after their kind, of the livestock after their kind, of every creeping thing of the ground after its kind, two of every sort will come to you, to keep them alive.
Take with you of all food that is eaten, and gather it to yourself; and it will be for food for you, and for them.”
Thus Noah did. He did all that God commanded him.   

## Job 1-2

**1**

There was a man in the land of Uz, whose name was Job. That man was blameless and upright, and one who feared God, and turned away from evil.
There were born to him seven sons and three daughters.
His possessions also were seven thousand sheep, three thousand camels, five hundred yoke of oxen, five hundred female donkeys, and a very great household; so that this man was the greatest of all the children of the east.
His sons went and held a feast in the house of each one on his birthday; and they sent and called for their three sisters to eat and to drink with them.
It was so, when the days of their feasting had run their course, that Job sent and sanctified them, and rose up early in the morning, and offered burnt offerings according to the number of them all. For Job said, “It may be that my sons have sinned, and renounced God in their hearts.” Job did so continually.  
Now on the day when God’s sons came to present themselves before Yahweh, Satan also came among them.
Yahweh said to Satan, “Where have you come from?”   Then Satan answered Yahweh, and said, “From going back and forth in the earth, and from walking up and down in it.”  
Yahweh said to Satan, “Have you considered my servant, Job? For there is no one like him in the earth, a blameless and an upright man, one who fears God, and turns away from evil.”  
Then Satan answered Yahweh, and said, “Does Job fear God for nothing?
Haven’t you made a hedge around him, and around his house, and around all that he has, on every side? You have blessed the work of his hands, and his substance is increased in the land.
But stretch out your hand now, and touch all that he has, and he will renounce you to your face.”  
Yahweh said to Satan, “Behold, all that he has is in your power. Only on himself don’t stretch out your hand.”   So Satan went out from the presence of Yahweh.
It fell on a day when his sons and his daughters were eating and drinking wine in their eldest brother’s house,
that there came a messenger to Job, and said, “The oxen were plowing, and the donkeys feeding beside them,
and the Sabeans attacked, and took them away. Yes, they have killed the servants with the edge of the sword, and I alone have escaped to tell you.”  
While he was still speaking, there also came another, and said, “The fire of God has fallen from the sky, and has burned up the sheep and the servants, and consumed them, and I alone have escaped to tell you.”  
While he was still speaking, there came also another, and said, “The Chaldeans made three bands, and swept down on the camels, and have taken them away, yes, and killed the servants with the edge of the sword; and I alone have escaped to tell you.”  
While he was still speaking, there came also another, and said, “Your sons and your daughters were eating and drinking wine in their eldest brother’s house,
and behold, there came a great wind from the wilderness, and struck the four corners of the house, and it fell on the young men, and they are dead. I alone have escaped to tell you.”  
Then Job arose, and tore his robe, and shaved his head, and fell down on the ground, and worshiped.
He said, “Naked I came out of my mother’s womb, and naked shall I return there. Yahweh gave, and Yahweh has taken away. Blessed be Yahweh’s name.”
In all this, Job did not sin, nor charge God with wrongdoing.   


**2**

Again, on the day when the God’s sons came to present themselves before Yahweh, Satan came also among them to present himself before Yahweh.
Yahweh said to Satan, “Where have you come from?”   Satan answered Yahweh, and said, “From going back and forth in the earth, and from walking up and down in it.”  
Yahweh said to Satan, “Have you considered my servant Job? For there is no one like him in the earth, a blameless and an upright man, one who fears God, and turns away from evil. He still maintains his integrity, although you incited me against him, to ruin him without cause.”  
Satan answered Yahweh, and said, “Skin for skin. Yes, all that a man has he will give for his life.
But stretch out your hand now, and touch his bone and his flesh, and he will renounce you to your face.”  
Yahweh said to Satan, “Behold, he is in your hand. Only spare his life.”  
So Satan went out from the presence of Yahweh, and struck Job with painful sores from the sole of his foot to his head.
He took for himself a potsherd to scrape himself with, and he sat among the ashes.
Then his wife said to him, “Do you still maintain your integrity? Renounce God, and die.”  
But he said to her, “You speak as one of the foolish women would speak. What? Shall we receive good at the hand of God, and shall we not receive evil?”   In all this Job didn’t sin with his lips.
Now when Job’s three friends heard of all this evil that had come on him, they each came from his own place: Eliphaz the Temanite, Bildad the Shuhite, and Zophar the Naamathite, and they made an appointment together to come to sympathize with him and to comfort him.
When they lifted up their eyes from a distance, and didn’t recognize him, they raised their voices, and wept; and they each tore his robe, and sprinkled dust on their heads toward the sky.
So they sat down with him on the ground seven days and seven nights, and no one spoke a word to him, for they saw that his grief was very great.   

## Matthew 1-2

**1**

The book of the genealogy of Jesus Christ, the son of David, the son of Abraham.
Abraham became the father of Isaac. Isaac became the father of Jacob. Jacob became the father of Judah and his brothers.
Judah became the father of Perez and Zerah by Tamar. Perez became the father of Hezron. Hezron became the father of Ram.
Ram became the father of Amminadab. Amminadab became the father of Nahshon. Nahshon became the father of Salmon.
Salmon became the father of Boaz by Rahab. Boaz became the father of Obed by Ruth. Obed became the father of Jesse.
Jesse became the father of King David. David became the father of Solomon by her who had been the wife of Uriah.
Solomon became the father of Rehoboam. Rehoboam became the father of Abijah. Abijah became the father of Asa.
Asa became the father of Jehoshaphat. Jehoshaphat became the father of Joram. Joram became the father of Uzziah.
Uzziah became the father of Jotham. Jotham became the father of Ahaz. Ahaz became the father of Hezekiah.
Hezekiah became the father of Manasseh. Manasseh became the father of Amon. Amon became the father of Josiah.
Josiah became the father of Jechoniah and his brothers, at the time of the exile to Babylon.
After the exile to Babylon, Jechoniah became the father of Shealtiel. Shealtiel became the father of Zerubbabel.
Zerubbabel became the father of Abiud. Abiud became the father of Eliakim. Eliakim became the father of Azor.
Azor became the father of Zadok. Zadok became the father of Achim. Achim became the father of Eliud.
Eliud became the father of Eleazar. Eleazar became the father of Matthan. Matthan became the father of Jacob.
Jacob became the father of Joseph, the husband of Mary, from whom was born Jesus, who is called Christ.
So all the generations from Abraham to David are fourteen generations; from David to the exile to Babylon fourteen generations; and from the carrying away to Babylon to the Christ, fourteen generations.  
Now the birth of Jesus Christ was like this; for after his mother, Mary, was engaged to Joseph, before they came together, she was found pregnant by the Holy Spirit.
Joseph, her husband, being a righteous man, and not willing to make her a public example, intended to put her away secretly.
But when he thought about these things, behold, an angel of the Lord appeared to him in a dream, saying, “Joseph, son of David, don’t be afraid to take to yourself Mary, your wife, for that which is conceived in her is of the Holy Spirit.
She shall give birth to a son. You shall call his name Jesus, for it is he who shall save his people from their sins.”  
Now all this has happened, that it might be fulfilled which was spoken by the Lord through the prophet, saying,  
“Behold, the virgin shall be with child, and shall give birth to a son. They shall call his name Immanuel”; which is, being interpreted, “God with us.”   
Joseph arose from his sleep, and did as the angel of the Lord commanded him, and took his wife to himself;
and didn’t know her sexually until she had given birth to her firstborn son. He named him Jesus.   


**2**

Now when Jesus was born in Bethlehem of Judea in the days of King Herod, behold, wise men from the east came to Jerusalem, saying,
“Where is he who is born King of the Jews? For we saw his star in the east, and have come to worship him.”
When King Herod heard it, he was troubled, and all Jerusalem with him.
Gathering together all the chief priests and scribes of the people, he asked them where the Christ would be born.
They said to him, “In Bethlehem of Judea, for this is written through the prophet,  
‘You Bethlehem, land of Judah, are in no way least among the princes of Judah: for out of you shall come a governor, who shall shepherd my people, Israel.’”   
Then Herod secretly called the wise men, and learned from them exactly what time the star appeared.
He sent them to Bethlehem, and said, “Go and search diligently for the young child. When you have found him, bring me word, so that I also may come and worship him.”  
They, having heard the king, went their way; and behold, the star, which they saw in the east, went before them, until it came and stood over where the young child was.
When they saw the star, they rejoiced with exceedingly great joy.
They came into the house and saw the young child with Mary, his mother, and they fell down and worshiped him. Opening their treasures, they offered to him gifts: gold, frankincense, and myrrh.
Being warned in a dream that they shouldn’t return to Herod, they went back to their own country another way.  
Now when they had departed, behold, an angel of the Lord appeared to Joseph in a dream, saying, “Arise and take the young child and his mother, and flee into Egypt, and stay there until I tell you, for Herod will seek the young child to destroy him.”  
He arose and took the young child and his mother by night, and departed into Egypt,
and was there until the death of Herod; that it might be fulfilled which was spoken by the Lord through the prophet, saying, “Out of Egypt I called my son.”  
Then Herod, when he saw that he was mocked by the wise men, was exceedingly angry, and sent out, and killed all the male children who were in Bethlehem and in all the surrounding countryside, from two years old and under, according to the exact time which he had learned from the wise men.
Then that which was spoken by Jeremiah the prophet was fulfilled, saying,  
“A voice was heard in Ramah, lamentation, weeping and great mourning, Rachel weeping for her children; she wouldn’t be comforted, because they are no more.”   
But when Herod was dead, behold, an angel of the Lord appeared in a dream to Joseph in Egypt, saying,
“Arise and take the young child and his mother, and go into the land of Israel, for those who sought the young child’s life are dead.”  
He arose and took the young child and his mother, and came into the land of Israel.
But when he heard that Archelaus was reigning over Judea in the place of his father, Herod, he was afraid to go there. Being warned in a dream, he withdrew into the region of Galilee,
and came and lived in a city called Nazareth; that it might be fulfilled which was spoken through the prophets: “He will be called a Nazarene.”   
