
## Genesis 7-12

**7**

Yahweh said to Noah, “Come with all of your household into the ship, for I have seen your righteousness before me in this generation.
You shall take seven pairs of every clean animal with you, the male and his female. Of the animals that are not clean, take two, the male and his female.
Also of the birds of the sky, seven and seven, male and female, to keep seed alive on the surface of all the earth.
In seven days, I will cause it to rain on the earth for forty days and forty nights. Every living thing that I have made, I will destroy from the surface of the ground.”  
Noah did everything that Yahweh commanded him.  
Noah was six hundred years old when the flood of waters came on the earth.
Noah went into the ship with his sons, his wife, and his sons’ wives, because of the floodwaters.
Clean animals, unclean animals, birds, and everything that creeps on the ground
went by pairs to Noah into the ship, male and female, as God commanded Noah.
After the seven days, the floodwaters came on the earth.
In the six hundredth year of Noah’s life, in the second month, on the seventeenth day of the month, on the same day all the fountains of the great deep were burst open, and the sky’s windows were opened.
It rained on the earth forty days and forty nights.  
In the same day Noah, and Shem, Ham, and Japheth—the sons of Noah—and Noah’s wife and the three wives of his sons with them, entered into the ship—
they, and every animal after its kind, all the livestock after their kind, every creeping thing that creeps on the earth after its kind, and every bird after its kind, every bird of every sort.
Pairs from all flesh with the breath of life in them went to Noah into the ship.
Those who went in, went in male and female of all flesh, as God commanded him; then Yahweh shut him in.
The flood was forty days on the earth. The waters increased, and lifted up the ship, and it was lifted up above the earth.
The waters rose, and increased greatly on the earth; and the ship floated on the surface of the waters.
The waters rose very high on the earth. All the high mountains that were under the whole sky were covered.
The waters rose fifteen cubits higher, and the mountains were covered.
All flesh died that moved on the earth, including birds, livestock, animals, every creeping thing that creeps on the earth, and every man.
All on the dry land, in whose nostrils was the breath of the spirit of life, died.
Every living thing was destroyed that was on the surface of the ground, including man, livestock, creeping things, and birds of the sky. They were destroyed from the earth. Only Noah was left, and those who were with him in the ship.
The waters flooded the earth one hundred fifty days.   


**8**

God remembered Noah, all the animals, and all the livestock that were with him in the ship; and God made a wind to pass over the earth. The waters subsided.
The deep’s fountains and the sky’s windows were also stopped, and the rain from the sky was restrained.
The waters continually receded from the earth. After the end of one hundred fifty days the waters decreased.
The ship rested in the seventh month, on the seventeenth day of the month, on Ararat’s mountains.
The waters receded continually until the tenth month. In the tenth month, on the first day of the month, the tops of the mountains were visible.  
At the end of forty days, Noah opened the window of the ship which he had made,
and he sent out a raven. It went back and forth, until the waters were dried up from the earth.
He himself sent out a dove to see if the waters were abated from the surface of the ground,
but the dove found no place to rest her foot, and she returned to him into the ship, for the waters were on the surface of the whole earth. He put out his hand, and took her, and brought her to him into the ship.
He waited yet another seven days; and again he sent the dove out of the ship.
The dove came back to him at evening and, behold, in her mouth was a freshly plucked olive leaf. So Noah knew that the waters were abated from the earth.
He waited yet another seven days, and sent out the dove; and she didn’t return to him anymore.  
In the six hundred first year, in the first month, the first day of the month, the waters were dried up from the earth. Noah removed the covering of the ship, and looked. He saw that the surface of the ground was dried.
In the second month, on the twenty-seventh day of the month, the earth was dry.  
God spoke to Noah, saying,
“Go out of the ship, you, and your wife, and your sons, and your sons’ wives with you.
Bring out with you every living thing that is with you of all flesh, including birds, livestock, and every creeping thing that creeps on the earth, that they may breed abundantly in the earth, and be fruitful, and multiply on the earth.”  
Noah went out, with his sons, his wife, and his sons’ wives with him.
Every animal, every creeping thing, and every bird, whatever moves on the earth, after their families, went out of the ship.  
Noah built an altar to Yahweh, and took of every clean animal, and of every clean bird, and offered burnt offerings on the altar.
Yahweh smelled the pleasant aroma. Yahweh said in his heart, “I will not again curse the ground any more for man’s sake because the imagination of man’s heart is evil from his youth; neither will I ever again strike every living thing, as I have done.
While the earth remains, seed time and harvest, and cold and heat, and summer and winter, and day and night will not cease.”   


**9**

God blessed Noah and his sons, and said to them, “Be fruitful, and multiply, and replenish the earth.
The fear of you and the dread of you will be on every animal of the earth, and on every bird of the sky. Everything that moves along the ground, and all the fish of the sea, are delivered into your hand.
Every moving thing that lives will be food for you. As I gave you the green herb, I have given everything to you.
But flesh with its life, that is, its blood, you shall not eat.
I will surely require your blood of your lives; at the hand of every animal I will require it. At the hand of man, even at the hand of every man’s brother, I will require the life of man.
Whoever sheds man’s blood, his blood will be shed by man, for God made man in his own image.
Be fruitful and multiply. Increase abundantly in the earth, and multiply in it.”  
God spoke to Noah and to his sons with him, saying,
“As for me, behold, I establish my covenant with you, and with your offspring after you,
and with every living creature that is with you: the birds, the livestock, and every animal of the earth with you, of all that go out of the ship, even every animal of the earth.
I will establish my covenant with you: All flesh will not be cut off any more by the waters of the flood, neither will there ever again be a flood to destroy the earth.”
God said, “This is the token of the covenant which I make between me and you and every living creature that is with you, for perpetual generations:
I set my rainbow in the cloud, and it will be a sign of a covenant between me and the earth.
When I bring a cloud over the earth, that the rainbow will be seen in the cloud,
and I will remember my covenant, which is between me and you and every living creature of all flesh, and the waters will no more become a flood to destroy all flesh.
The rainbow will be in the cloud. I will look at it, that I may remember the everlasting covenant between God and every living creature of all flesh that is on the earth.”
God said to Noah, “This is the token of the covenant which I have established between me and all flesh that is on the earth.”  
The sons of Noah who went out from the ship were Shem, Ham, and Japheth. Ham is the father of Canaan.
These three were the sons of Noah, and from these, the whole earth was populated.  
Noah began to be a farmer, and planted a vineyard.
He drank of the wine and got drunk. He was uncovered within his tent.
Ham, the father of Canaan, saw the nakedness of his father, and told his two brothers outside.
Shem and Japheth took a garment, and laid it on both their shoulders, went in backwards, and covered the nakedness of their father. Their faces were backwards, and they didn’t see their father’s nakedness.
Noah awoke from his wine, and knew what his youngest son had done to him.
He said,  “Canaan is cursed. He will be a servant of servants to his brothers.”   
He said,  “Blessed be Yahweh, the God of Shem. Let Canaan be his servant. 
May God enlarge Japheth. Let him dwell in the tents of Shem. Let Canaan be his servant.”   
Noah lived three hundred fifty years after the flood.
All the days of Noah were nine hundred fifty years, and then he died.   


**10**

Now this is the history of the generations of the sons of Noah and of Shem, Ham, and Japheth. Sons were born to them after the flood.  
The sons of Japheth were: Gomer, Magog, Madai, Javan, Tubal, Meshech, and Tiras.
The sons of Gomer were: Ashkenaz, Riphath, and Togarmah.
The sons of Javan were: Elishah, Tarshish, Kittim, and Dodanim.
Of these were the islands of the nations divided in their lands, everyone after his language, after their families, in their nations.  
The sons of Ham were: Cush, Mizraim, Put, and Canaan.
The sons of Cush were: Seba, Havilah, Sabtah, Raamah, and Sabteca. The sons of Raamah were: Sheba and Dedan.
Cush became the father of Nimrod. He began to be a mighty one in the earth.
He was a mighty hunter before Yahweh. Therefore it is said, “like Nimrod, a mighty hunter before Yahweh”.
The beginning of his kingdom was Babel, Erech, Accad, and Calneh, in the land of Shinar.
Out of that land he went into Assyria, and built Nineveh, Rehoboth Ir, Calah,
and Resen between Nineveh and the great city Calah.
Mizraim became the father of Ludim, Anamim, Lehabim, Naphtuhim,
Pathrusim, Casluhim (which the Philistines descended from), and Caphtorim.  
Canaan became the father of Sidon (his firstborn), Heth,
the Jebusites, the Amorites, the Girgashites,
the Hivites, the Arkites, the Sinites,
the Arvadites, the Zemarites, and the Hamathites. Afterward the families of the Canaanites were spread abroad.
The border of the Canaanites was from Sidon—as you go toward Gerar—to Gaza—as you go toward Sodom, Gomorrah, Admah, and Zeboiim—to Lasha.
These are the sons of Ham, after their families, according to their languages, in their lands and their nations.  
Children were also born to Shem, the father of all the children of Eber, the elder brother of Japheth.
The sons of Shem were: Elam, Asshur, Arpachshad, Lud, and Aram.
The sons of Aram were: Uz, Hul, Gether, and Mash.
Arpachshad became the father of Shelah. Shelah became the father of Eber.
To Eber were born two sons. The name of the one was Peleg, for in his days the earth was divided. His brother’s name was Joktan.
Joktan became the father of Almodad, Sheleph, Hazarmaveth, Jerah,
Hadoram, Uzal, Diklah,
Obal, Abimael, Sheba,
Ophir, Havilah, and Jobab. All these were the sons of Joktan.
Their dwelling extended from Mesha, as you go toward Sephar, the mountain of the east.
These are the sons of Shem, by their families, according to their languages, lands, and nations.  
These are the families of the sons of Noah, by their generations, according to their nations. The nations divided from these in the earth after the flood.   


**11**

The whole earth was of one language and of one speech.
As they traveled east, they found a plain in the land of Shinar, and they lived there.
They said one to another, “Come, let’s make bricks, and burn them thoroughly.” They had brick for stone, and they used tar for mortar.
They said, “Come, let’s build ourselves a city, and a tower whose top reaches to the sky, and let’s make ourselves a name, lest we be scattered abroad on the surface of the whole earth.”  
Yahweh came down to see the city and the tower, which the children of men built.
Yahweh said, “Behold, they are one people, and they have all one language, and this is what they begin to do. Now nothing will be withheld from them, which they intend to do.
Come, let’s go down, and there confuse their language, that they may not understand one another’s speech.”
So Yahweh scattered them abroad from there on the surface of all the earth. They stopped building the city.
Therefore its name was called Babel, because there Yahweh confused the language of all the earth. From there, Yahweh scattered them abroad on the surface of all the earth.  
This is the history of the generations of Shem. Shem was one hundred years old and became the father of Arpachshad two years after the flood.
Shem lived five hundred years after he became the father of Arpachshad, and became the father of sons and daughters.  
Arpachshad lived thirty-five years and became the father of Shelah.
Arpachshad lived four hundred three years after he became the father of Shelah, and became the father of sons and daughters.  
Shelah lived thirty years, and became the father of Eber:
and Shelah lived four hundred three years after he became the father of Eber, and became the father of sons and daughters.  
Eber lived thirty-four years, and became the father of Peleg.
Eber lived four hundred thirty years after he became the father of Peleg, and became the father of sons and daughters.  
Peleg lived thirty years, and became the father of Reu.
Peleg lived two hundred nine years after he became the father of Reu, and became the father of sons and daughters.  
Reu lived thirty-two years, and became the father of Serug.
Reu lived two hundred seven years after he became the father of Serug, and became the father of sons and daughters.  
Serug lived thirty years, and became the father of Nahor.
Serug lived two hundred years after he became the father of Nahor, and became the father of sons and daughters.  
Nahor lived twenty-nine years, and became the father of Terah.
Nahor lived one hundred nineteen years after he became the father of Terah, and became the father of sons and daughters.  
Terah lived seventy years, and became the father of Abram, Nahor, and Haran.  
Now this is the history of the generations of Terah. Terah became the father of Abram, Nahor, and Haran. Haran became the father of Lot.
Haran died before his father Terah in the land of his birth, in Ur of the Chaldees.
Abram and Nahor took wives. The name of Abram’s wife was Sarai, and the name of Nahor’s wife, Milcah, the daughter of Haran who was also the father of Iscah.
Sarai was barren. She had no child.
Terah took Abram his son, Lot the son of Haran, his son’s son, and Sarai his daughter-in-law, his son Abram’s wife. They went from Ur of the Chaldees, to go into the land of Canaan. They came to Haran and lived there.
The days of Terah were two hundred five years. Terah died in Haran.   


**12**

Now Yahweh said to Abram, “Get out of your country, and from your relatives, and from your father’s house, to the land that I will show you.
I will make of you a great nation. I will bless you and make your name great. You will be a blessing.
I will bless those who bless you, and I will curse him who curses you. All of the families of the earth will be blessed in you.”  
So Abram went, as Yahweh had spoken to him. Lot went with him. Abram was seventy-five years old when he departed out of Haran.
Abram took Sarai his wife, Lot his brother’s son, all their substance that they had gathered, and the souls whom they had gotten in Haran, and they went to go into the land of Canaan. Into the land of Canaan they came.
Abram passed through the land to the place of Shechem, to the oak of Moreh. The Canaanite was then in the land.  
Yahweh appeared to Abram and said, “I will give this land to your seed.”    He built an altar there to Yahweh, who appeared to him.
He left from there to the mountain on the east of Bethel, and pitched his tent, having Bethel on the west, and Ai on the east. There he built an altar to Yahweh and called on Yahweh’s name.
Abram traveled, going on still toward the South.  
There was a famine in the land. Abram went down into Egypt to live as a foreigner there, for the famine was severe in the land.
When he had come near to enter Egypt, he said to Sarai his wife, “See now, I know that you are a beautiful woman to look at.
It will happen, when the Egyptians will see you, that they will say, ‘This is his wife.’ They will kill me, but they will save you alive.
Please say that you are my sister, that it may be well with me for your sake, and that my soul may live because of you.”  
When Abram had come into Egypt, Egyptians saw that the woman was very beautiful.
The princes of Pharaoh saw her, and praised her to Pharaoh; and the woman was taken into Pharaoh’s house.
He dealt well with Abram for her sake. He had sheep, cattle, male donkeys, male servants, female servants, female donkeys, and camels.
Yahweh plagued Pharaoh and his house with great plagues because of Sarai, Abram’s wife.
Pharaoh called Abram and said, “What is this that you have done to me? Why didn’t you tell me that she was your wife?
Why did you say, ‘She is my sister,’ so that I took her to be my wife? Now therefore, see your wife, take her, and go your way.”  
Pharaoh commanded men concerning him, and they brought him on the way with his wife and all that he had.   

## Job 3-4

**3**

After this Job opened his mouth, and cursed the day of his birth.
Job answered:  
“Let the day perish in which I was born, the night which said, ‘There is a boy conceived.’ 
Let that day be darkness. Don’t let God from above seek for it, neither let the light shine on it. 
Let darkness and the shadow of death claim it for their own. Let a cloud dwell on it. Let all that makes black the day terrify it. 
As for that night, let thick darkness seize on it. Let it not rejoice among the days of the year. Let it not come into the number of the months. 
Behold, let that night be barren. Let no joyful voice come therein. 
Let them curse it who curse the day, who are ready to rouse up leviathan. 
Let the stars of its twilight be dark. Let it look for light, but have none, neither let it see the eyelids of the morning, 
because it didn’t shut up the doors of my mother’s womb, nor did it hide trouble from my eyes.   
“Why didn’t I die from the womb? Why didn’t I give up the spirit when my mother bore me? 
Why did the knees receive me? Or why the breast, that I should nurse? 
For now should I have lain down and been quiet. I should have slept, then I would have been at rest, 
with kings and counselors of the earth, who built up waste places for themselves; 
or with princes who had gold, who filled their houses with silver: 
or as a hidden untimely birth I had not been, as infants who never saw light. 
There the wicked cease from troubling. There the weary are at rest. 
There the prisoners are at ease together. They don’t hear the voice of the taskmaster. 
The small and the great are there. The servant is free from his master.   
“Why is light given to him who is in misery, life to the bitter in soul, 
Who long for death, but it doesn’t come; and dig for it more than for hidden treasures, 
who rejoice exceedingly, and are glad, when they can find the grave? 
Why is light given to a man whose way is hidden, whom God has hedged in? 
For my sighing comes before I eat. My groanings are poured out like water. 
For the thing which I fear comes on me, That which I am afraid of comes to me. 
I am not at ease, neither am I quiet, neither have I rest; but trouble comes.”    


**4**

Then Eliphaz the Temanite answered,  
“If someone ventures to talk with you, will you be grieved? But who can withhold himself from speaking? 
Behold, you have instructed many, you have strengthened the weak hands. 
Your words have supported him who was falling, You have made firm the feeble knees. 
But now it has come to you, and you faint. It touches you, and you are troubled. 
Isn’t your piety your confidence? Isn’t the integrity of your ways your hope?   
“Remember, now, whoever perished, being innocent? Or where were the upright cut off? 
According to what I have seen, those who plow iniquity, and sow trouble, reap the same. 
By the breath of God they perish. By the blast of his anger are they consumed. 
The roaring of the lion, and the voice of the fierce lion, the teeth of the young lions, are broken. 
The old lion perishes for lack of prey. The cubs of the lioness are scattered abroad.   
“Now a thing was secretly brought to me. My ear received a whisper of it. 
In thoughts from the visions of the night, when deep sleep falls on men, 
fear came on me, and trembling, which made all my bones shake. 
Then a spirit passed before my face. The hair of my flesh stood up. 
It stood still, but I couldn’t discern its appearance. A form was before my eyes. Silence, then I heard a voice, saying, 
‘Shall mortal man be more just than God? Shall a man be more pure than his Maker? 
Behold, he puts no trust in his servants. He charges his angels with error. 
How much more, those who dwell in houses of clay, whose foundation is in the dust, who are crushed before the moth! 
Between morning and evening they are destroyed. They perish forever without any regarding it. 
Isn’t their tent cord plucked up within them? They die, and that without wisdom.’    

## Matthew 3-6

**3**

In those days, John the Baptizer came, preaching in the wilderness of Judea, saying,
“Repent, for the Kingdom of Heaven is at hand!”
For this is he who was spoken of by Isaiah the prophet, saying,  “The voice of one crying in the wilderness, make ready the way of the Lord. Make his paths straight.”   
Now John himself wore clothing made of camel’s hair, with a leather belt around his waist. His food was locusts and wild honey.
Then people from Jerusalem, all of Judea, and all the region around the Jordan went out to him.
They were baptized by him in the Jordan, confessing their sins.
But when he saw many of the Pharisees and Sadducees coming for his baptism, he said to them, “You offspring of vipers, who warned you to flee from the wrath to come?
Therefore produce fruit worthy of repentance!
Don’t think to yourselves, ‘We have Abraham for our father,’ for I tell you that God is able to raise up children to Abraham from these stones.  
“Even now the ax lies at the root of the trees. Therefore every tree that doesn’t produce good fruit is cut down, and cast into the fire.
I indeed baptize you in water for repentance, but he who comes after me is mightier than I, whose shoes I am not worthy to carry. He will baptize you in the Holy Spirit.
His winnowing fork is in his hand, and he will thoroughly cleanse his threshing floor. He will gather his wheat into the barn, but the chaff he will burn up with unquenchable fire.”  
Then Jesus came from Galilee to the Jordan to John, to be baptized by him.
But John would have hindered him, saying, “I need to be baptized by you, and you come to me?”  
But Jesus, answering, said to him, “Allow it now, for this is the fitting way for us to fulfill all righteousness.” Then he allowed him.
Jesus, when he was baptized, went up directly from the water: and behold, the heavens were opened to him. He saw the Spirit of God descending as a dove, and coming on him.
Behold, a voice out of the heavens said, “This is my beloved Son, with whom I am well pleased.”   


**4**

Then Jesus was led up by the Spirit into the wilderness to be tempted by the devil.
When he had fasted forty days and forty nights, he was hungry afterward.
The tempter came and said to him, “If you are the Son of God, command that these stones become bread.”  
But he answered, “It is written, ‘Man shall not live by bread alone, but by every word that proceeds out of the mouth of God.’”  
Then the devil took him into the holy city. He set him on the pinnacle of the temple,
and said to him, “If you are the Son of God, throw yourself down, for it is written, ‘He will put his angels in charge of you.’ and,  ‘On their hands they will bear you up, so that you don’t dash your foot against a stone.’”   
Jesus said to him, “Again, it is written, ‘You shall not test the Lord, your God.’”  
Again, the devil took him to an exceedingly high mountain, and showed him all the kingdoms of the world, and their glory.
He said to him, “I will give you all of these things, if you will fall down and worship me.”  
Then Jesus said to him, “Get behind me,Satan! For it is written, ‘You shall worship the Lord your God, and you shall serve him only.’”   
Then the devil left him, and behold, angels came and served him.
Now when Jesus heard that John was delivered up, he withdrew into Galilee.
Leaving Nazareth, he came and lived in Capernaum, which is by the sea, in the region of Zebulun and Naphtali,
that it might be fulfilled which was spoken through Isaiah the prophet, saying,  
“The land of Zebulun and the land of Naphtali, toward the sea, beyond the Jordan, Galilee of the Gentiles, 
the people who sat in darkness saw a great light, to those who sat in the region and shadow of death, to them light has dawned.”   
From that time, Jesus began to preach, and to say, “Repent! For the Kingdom of Heaven is at hand.”  
Walking by the sea of Galilee, he saw two brothers: Simon, who is called Peter, and Andrew, his brother, casting a net into the sea; for they were fishermen.
He said to them, “Come after me, and I will make you fishers for men.”  
They immediately left their nets and followed him.
Going on from there, he saw two other brothers, James the son of Zebedee, and John his brother, in the boat with Zebedee their father, mending their nets. He called them.
They immediately left the boat and their father, and followed him.  
Jesus went about in all Galilee, teaching in their synagogues, preaching the Good News of the Kingdom, and healing every disease and every sickness among the people.
The report about him went out into all Syria. They brought to him all who were sick, afflicted with various diseases and torments, possessed with demons, epileptics, and paralytics; and he healed them.
Great multitudes from Galilee, Decapolis, Jerusalem, Judea and from beyond the Jordan followed him.   


**5**

Seeing the multitudes, he went up onto the mountain. When he had sat down, his disciples came to him.
He opened his mouth and taught them, saying,  
“Blessed are the poor in spirit, for theirs is the Kingdom of Heaven. 
Blessed are those who mourn, for they shall be comforted. 
Blessed are the gentle, for they shall inherit the earth. 
Blessed are those who hunger and thirst after righteousness,  for they shall be filled. 
Blessed are the merciful, for they shall obtain mercy. 
Blessed are the pure in heart, for they shall see God. 
Blessed are the peacemakers, for they shall be called children of God. 
Blessed are those who have been persecuted for righteousness’ sake,  for theirs is the Kingdom of Heaven.   
“Blessed are you when people reproach you, persecute you, and say all kinds of evil against you falsely, for my sake. 
Rejoice, and be exceedingly glad, for great is your reward in heaven. For that is how they persecuted the prophets who were before you.   
“You are the salt of the earth, but if the salt has lost its flavor, with what will it be salted? It is then good for nothing, but to be cast out and trodden under the feet of men. 
You are the light of the world. A city located on a hill can’t be hidden. 
Neither do you light a lamp, and put it under a measuring basket, but on a stand; and it shines to all who are in the house. 
Even so, let your light shine before men; that they may see your good works, and glorify your Father who is in heaven.  
“Don’t think that I came to destroy the law or the prophets. I didn’t come to destroy, but to fulfill. 
For most certainly, I tell you, until heaven and earth pass away, not even one smallest letteror one tiny pen stroke shall in any way pass away from the law, until all things are accomplished. 
Whoever, therefore, shall break one of these least commandments, and teach others to do so, shall be called least in the Kingdom of Heaven; but whoever shall do and teach them shall be called great in the Kingdom of Heaven. 
For I tell you that unless your righteousness exceeds that of the scribes and Pharisees, there is no way you will enter into the Kingdom of Heaven.  
“You have heard that it was said to the ancient ones, ‘You shall not murder;’ and ‘Whoever shall murder shall be in danger of the judgment.’ 
But I tell you, that everyone who is angry with his brother without a cause   shall be in danger of the judgment; and whoever shall say to his brother, ‘Raca!’ shall be in danger of the council; and whoever shall say, ‘You fool!’ shall be in danger of the fire of Gehenna.   
“If therefore you are offering your gift at the altar, and there remember that your brother has anything against you, 
leave your gift there before the altar, and go your way. First be reconciled to your brother, and then come and offer your gift. 
Agree with your adversary quickly, while you are with him on the way; lest perhaps the prosecutor deliver you to the judge, and the judge deliver you to the officer, and you be cast into prison. 
Most certainly I tell you, you shall by no means get out of there, until you have paid the last penny.  
“You have heard that it was said,  ‘You shall not commit adultery;’
but I tell you that everyone who gazes at a woman to lust after her has committed adultery with her already in his heart. 
If your right eye causes you to stumble, pluck it out and throw it away from you. For it is more profitable for you that one of your members should perish, than for your whole body to be cast into Gehenna.
If your right hand causes you to stumble, cut it off, and throw it away from you. For it is more profitable for you that one of your members should perish, than for your whole body to be cast into Gehenna.  
“It was also said, ‘Whoever shall put away his wife, let him give her a writing of divorce,’
but I tell you that whoever puts away his wife, except for the cause of sexual immorality, makes her an adulteress; and whoever marries her when she is put away commits adultery.  
“Again you have heard that it was said to them of old time, ‘You shall not make false vows, but shall perform to the Lord your vows,’ 
but I tell you, don’t swear at all: neither by heaven, for it is the throne of God; 
nor by the earth, for it is the footstool of his feet; nor by Jerusalem, for it is the city of the great King. 
Neither shall you swear by your head, for you can’t make one hair white or black. 
But let your ‘Yes’ be ‘Yes’ and your ‘No’ be ‘No.’ Whatever is more than these is of the evil one.  
“You have heard that it was said, ‘An eye for an eye, and a tooth for a tooth.’
But I tell you, don’t resist him who is evil; but whoever strikes you on your right cheek, turn to him the other also. 
If anyone sues you to take away your coat, let him have your cloak also. 
Whoever compels you to go one mile, go with him two. 
Give to him who asks you, and don’t turn away him who desires to borrow from you.  
“You have heard that it was said, ‘You shall love your neighbor,  and hate your enemy.’
But I tell you, love your enemies, bless those who curse you, do good to those who hate you, and pray for those who mistreat you and persecute you, 
that you may be children of your Father who is in heaven. For he makes his sun to rise on the evil and the good, and sends rain on the just and the unjust. 
For if you love those who love you, what reward do you have? Don’t even the tax collectors do the same? 
If you only greet your friends, what more do you do than others? Don’t even the tax collectors do the same? 
Therefore you shall be perfect, just as your Father in heaven is perfect.   


**6**

“Be careful that you don’t do your charitable giving before men, to be seen by them, or else you have no reward from your Father who is in heaven. 
Therefore when you do merciful deeds, don’t sound a trumpet before yourself, as the hypocrites do in the synagogues and in the streets, that they may get glory from men. Most certainly I tell you, they have received their reward. 
But when you do merciful deeds, don’t let your left hand know what your right hand does, 
so that your merciful deeds may be in secret, then your Father who sees in secret will reward you openly.  
“When you pray, you shall not be as the hypocrites, for they love to stand and pray in the synagogues and in the corners of the streets, that they may be seen by men. Most certainly, I tell you, they have received their reward. 
But you, when you pray, enter into your inner room, and having shut your door, pray to your Father who is in secret, and your Father who sees in secret will reward you openly. 
In praying, don’t use vain repetitions, as the Gentiles do; for they think that they will be heard for their much speaking. 
Therefore don’t be like them, for your Father knows what things you need, before you ask him. 
Pray like this: ‘Our Father in heaven, may your name be kept holy. 
Let your Kingdom come. Let your will be done, as in heaven, so on earth. 
Give us today our daily bread. 
Forgive us our debts, as we also forgive our debtors. 
Bring us not into temptation, but deliver us from the evil one. For yours is the Kingdom, the power, and the glory forever. Amen. ’  
“For if you forgive men their trespasses, your heavenly Father will also forgive you. 
But if you don’t forgive men their trespasses, neither will your Father forgive your trespasses.  
“Moreover when you fast, don’t be like the hypocrites, with sad faces. For they disfigure their faces, that they may be seen by men to be fasting. Most certainly I tell you, they have received their reward. 
But you, when you fast, anoint your head, and wash your face; 
so that you are not seen by men to be fasting, but by your Father who is in secret, and your Father, who sees in secret, will reward you.   
“Don’t lay up treasures for yourselves on the earth, where moth and rust consume, and where thieves break through and steal; 
but lay up for yourselves treasures in heaven, where neither moth nor rust consume, and where thieves don’t break through and steal; 
for where your treasure is, there your heart will be also.   
“The lamp of the body is the eye. If therefore your eye is sound, your whole body will be full of light. 
But if your eye is evil, your whole body will be full of darkness. If therefore the light that is in you is darkness, how great is the darkness!   
“No one can serve two masters, for either he will hate the one and love the other; or else he will be devoted to one and despise the other. You can’t serve both God and Mammon. 
Therefore I tell you, don’t be anxious for your life: what you will eat, or what you will drink; nor yet for your body, what you will wear. Isn’t life more than food, and the body more than clothing? 
See the birds of the sky, that they don’t sow, neither do they reap, nor gather into barns. Your heavenly Father feeds them. Aren’t you of much more value than they?  
“Which of you, by being anxious, can add one momentto his lifespan? 
Why are you anxious about clothing? Consider the lilies of the field, how they grow. They don’t toil, neither do they spin, 
yet I tell you that even Solomon in all his glory was not dressed like one of these. 
But if God so clothes the grass of the field, which today exists, and tomorrow is thrown into the oven, won’t he much more clothe you, you of little faith?  
“Therefore don’t be anxious, saying, ‘What will we eat?’, ‘What will we drink?’ or, ‘With what will we be clothed?’ 
For the Gentiles seek after all these things; for your heavenly Father knows that you need all these things. 
But seek first God’s Kingdom, and his righteousness; and all these things will be given to you as well. 
Therefore don’t be anxious for tomorrow, for tomorrow will be anxious for itself. Each day’s own evil is sufficient.   
